TITLE: Making a LaTeX thesis template
DATE: 2020-09-15
AUTHOR: John L. Godlee
====================================================================


Terrifyingly, it’s not too long before I have to start writing my
PhD thesis. To save myself some headaches down the line I put
together a LaTeX thesis template system for myself. The template
itself can be found [here].

  [here]: https://johngodlee.github.io/files/latex_thesis/template.zip

The template hinges on compile.sh, which contains a shell script
which can compile the thesis, each chapter separately, and
optionally clean up auxilliary TeX files after using the -c flag.

The directory structure is paramount to make sure all the parts work
together, and as a result the template isn’t that flexible, but it
works for my needs.

Below is a copy of the README.md found in the template, which
details how it works:

Directory structure

main.tex contains the top-level .tex skeleton file which calls all
other files.

frontmatter/ contains various .tex files used in the main thesis:
title page (ttl.tex), acknowledgements (ack.tex), etc.

img/ contains all images used in the thesis.

appendices contains subdirectories each referring to a thesis-level
appendix, similar to a chapter.

chapters contains subdirectories each referring to a thesis chapter.
Each chapter should have a defin.tex which defines LaTeX variables
for the chapter name and the chapter directory (e.g. chapter_1).

preamble.tex contains all the preamble material used for the thesis.
It is also called by chapter.tex.

chapter.tex contains a skeleton file to create individually
formatted chapters.

definitions.tex contains thesis-level LaTeX variables: thesis title,
author name, thesis date, etc.

compile.sh contains a shell script which can compile the thesis,
each chapter, and optionally clean up auxilliary TeX files after
using the -c flag.

out contains all compiled .pdf files.

Packages

Various packages are used to create this template:

inputenc, babel and csquotes set English language rules.

geometry sets page margins.

pdflscape allows landscape pages with \begin{landscape}.

setspace sets line spacing to 1.5.

fancyhdr sets page headers for chapters with the following settings:

    \pagestyle{fancy}
    \lhead[\leftmark]{}
    \rhead[]{\leftmark}

framed allows for framed text boxes with
\begin{minipage}{\linewidth}\begin{framed}.

float and subfig allow for compound figures:

    \begin{figure}[H]
        \subfloat[]{{\includegraphics[width=0.3\textwidth]{img_file_a}}
        \label{img_label_a}}%
        \qquad
        \subfloat[]{{\includegraphics[width=0.4\textwidth]{img_file_b}}
        \label{img_label_b}}%
        \caption{Caption text}
        \label{img_label_all}
    \end{figure}

multirow and longtable allow for more flexible table formatting

biblatex handles referencing.

textcomp, siunitx, and amsmath provide many symbols and extended
text characters.

appendix handles appendices better than the basic \appendix{}

hyperref provides hyperlinks between sections, to references, to
DOIs and URLs.

Usage

main.tex can be altered to include new chapters, or to change the
order of chapters.

Each chapter should reside in its own directory within chapters.
Each chapter .tex file should be accompanied by a defin.tex which
defines two key LaTeX variables: \chaptertitle and chapterdir which
define the title of the chapter and the directory the chapter
resides in, respectively.

Chapter .tex files should be wrapped in
\begin{refsection} ... \end{refsection} to ensure that references
come at the end of the chapter, rather than the end of the thesis.

Notable mentions

Inspiration for this template came from other projects:

-   [uoe-gits / EdThesis LaTeX template · GitLab] - Created by
    Magnus Hagdorn back in 2003.
-   [Writing a PhD Thesis in LaTeX Johannes Miocic] - A more
    recent attempt, from 2015, the blog has links to other useful
    PhD thesis LaTeX projects.

  [uoe-gits / EdThesis LaTeX template · GitLab]: https://git.ecdf.ed.ac.uk/uoe-gits/edthesis
  [Writing a PhD Thesis in LaTeX Johannes Miocic]: https://jojomio.wordpress.com/2014/02/14/writing-a-phd-thesis-in-latex/
